README.md, before:

# Waffle Dashboard <!-- omit in toc -->

"Give a man a waffle and he’ll eat for a day. Teach a man to waffle and he’ll never be sad again."

> This project is dedicated to all the amazing companies made up of wonderful people who know how to really waffle it with their employees. Shine bright, one waffle at a time. The world needs more of you.

The Waffle Dashboard is a lightweight, self-hostable application for tracking and celebrating your team/family/friend group's waffle consumption. It provides stats, leaderboards, and input forms to capture waffle-eating achievements.

![screenshot of the waffle dashboard](docs/screenshots/dashboard.png)
_Check out the [docs/screenshots](docs/screenshots) folder._

> Please star the repository if you find this project useful - it helps me understand how many people rely on it when making changes.

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Get the Waffle Dashboard](#get-the-waffle-dashboard)
- [Software Development Process](#software-development-process)
  - [Requirements Definition](#requirements-definition)
  - [Design (Mockups)](#design-mockups)
  - [Architecture](#architecture)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Maintenance](#maintenance)
- [Contribution](#contribution)

## Get the Waffle Dashboard

The self-hosted setup is very quick and easy - just follow the **[Waffle Installation Guide](docs/WAFFLE-INSTALLATION-GUIDE.md)**.

If you want to customize the software's style, also consider the **[Custom Waffle Dashboard Guide](docs/CUSTOM-WAFFLE-DASHBOARD-GUIDE.md)**.

## Software Development Process

For this project, I opted for a variant of the classic waterfall model, which can be found, for example, in Ian Sommerville's well-known book [“Software Engineering, 9th edition, 2010: p.10](https://engineering.futureuniversity.com/BOOKS%20FOR%20IT/Software-Engineering-9th-Edition-by-Ian-Sommerville.pdf#page=47)”.

The Markdown documents for the [Requirements Definition](#requirements-definition) and [Architecture](#architecture) phases are based on the [version 1.1.1 of the ADF documentation template](https://github.com/architecture-decomposition-framework/adf-documentation-template/blob/main/template/architecture-documentation-en.md), which belongs to the [Architecture Decomposition Framework (ADF)](https://www.iese.fraunhofer.de/blog/softwarearchitekturen-einfacher-designen-und-verstaendlicher-dokumentieren-mit-dem-fraunhofer-adf/) developed by [Fraunhofer IESE](https://www.iese.fraunhofer.de/en/aboutus.html#:~:text=The%20Fraunhofer%20Institute%20for%20Experimental,engineering%20for%20almost%2030%20years.).

> Starting on Oct 31 2025 (from [IMPLEMENTATION.md step 21](docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md#21-add-waffle-day-events) onward), additional application features were managed via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/lchristmann/waffle-dashboard/issues).
> Their additions therefore do not appear in the first three documents below.

### Requirements Definition

See [docs/1_REQUIREMENTS.md](docs/1_REQUIREMENTS.md).

### Design (Mockups)

See [docs/2_DESIGN.md](docs/2_DESIGN.md).

### Architecture

See [docs/3_ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/3_ARCHITECTURE.md).

### Implementation

See [docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md](docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md).

## Maintenance

This project actively maintained by [me](https://github.com/lchristmann).

For questions or support, just [email me](mailto:hello@lchristmann.com).

## Contribution

See the [Contribution Guide](docs/CONTRIBUTION-GUIDE.md) and the [Developer Docs](DEVELOPER-DOCS.md).

Commit message:

fix+perf+release: v2.2.0, fix year select in Dashboard, add optimize commands in entrypoint

README.md, after:

# Waffle Dashboard <!-- omit in toc -->

"Give a man a waffle and he’ll eat for a day. Teach a man to waffle and he’ll never be sad again."

> This project is dedicated to all the amazing companies - made up of wonderful people - who know how to really waffle it with their employees. Shine bright, one waffle at a time! The world needs more of you.

A self-hostable web app you can spin up on your own server to track waffle-eating achievements and preserve the memories behind them.
Bring your squad together: track totals, share photos, organize events and cheer each other on!

![screenshot of the waffle dashboard](docs/screenshots/dashboard.png)
_Check out the [docs/screenshots](docs/screenshots) folder._

> Please star the repository if you find this project useful - it helps me understand how many people rely on it when making changes.

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Get the Waffle Dashboard](#get-the-waffle-dashboard)
- [Software Development Process](#software-development-process)
  - [Requirements Definition](#requirements-definition)
  - [Design (Mockups)](#design-mockups)
  - [Architecture](#architecture)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Maintenance](#maintenance)
- [Contribution](#contribution)

## Get the Waffle Dashboard

The self-hosted setup is very quick and easy - just follow the **[Waffle Installation Guide](docs/WAFFLE-INSTALLATION-GUIDE.md)**.

If you want to customize the software's style, also consider the **[Custom Waffle Dashboard Guide](docs/CUSTOM-WAFFLE-DASHBOARD-GUIDE.md)**.

## Software Development Process

For this project, I opted for a variant of the classic waterfall model, which can be found, for example, in Ian Sommerville's well-known book [“Software Engineering, 9th edition, 2010: p.10](https://engineering.futureuniversity.com/BOOKS%20FOR%20IT/Software-Engineering-9th-Edition-by-Ian-Sommerville.pdf#page=47)”.

The Markdown documents for the [Requirements Definition](#requirements-definition) and [Architecture](#architecture) phases are based on the [version 1.1.1 of the ADF documentation template](https://github.com/architecture-decomposition-framework/adf-documentation-template/blob/main/template/architecture-documentation-en.md), which belongs to the [Architecture Decomposition Framework (ADF)](https://www.iese.fraunhofer.de/blog/softwarearchitekturen-einfacher-designen-und-verstaendlicher-dokumentieren-mit-dem-fraunhofer-adf/) developed by [Fraunhofer IESE](https://www.iese.fraunhofer.de/en/aboutus.html#:~:text=The%20Fraunhofer%20Institute%20for%20Experimental,engineering%20for%20almost%2030%20years.).

Starting on Oct 31 2025 (from [IMPLEMENTATION.md step 21](docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md#21-add-waffle-day-events) onward), additional application features were managed via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/lchristmann/waffle-dashboard/issues).
Their additions do not appear in the first three documents below.
The project thereby switched to and is now following an agile, iterative development approach well suited for further developing the software.

### Requirements Definition

See [docs/1_REQUIREMENTS.md](docs/1_REQUIREMENTS.md).

### Design (Mockups)

See [docs/2_DESIGN.md](docs/2_DESIGN.md).

### Architecture

See [docs/3_ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/3_ARCHITECTURE.md).

### Implementation

See [docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md](docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md).

## Maintenance

This project is actively maintained by [me](https://github.com/lchristmann).

For questions or support, just [email me](mailto:hello@lchristmann.com).

## Contribution

See the [Contribution Guide](docs/CONTRIBUTION-GUIDE.md) and the [Developer Docs](DEVELOPER-DOCS.md).
