docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md, before:

# Implementation (Coding) <!-- omit in toc -->

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [1. New Laravel+Docker project](#1-new-laraveldocker-project)
- [2. Install Filament and create Artisan command for making admin users](#2-install-filament-and-create-artisan-command-for-making-admin-users)
- [3. Add profile page and fully implement the data model](#3-add-profile-page-and-fully-implement-the-data-model)
- [4. Add the users CRUD page (only for admins)](#4-add-the-users-crud-page-only-for-admins)
- [5. Enhance the users CRUD page (only for admins)](#5-enhance-the-users-crud-page-only-for-admins)
- [6. Fix user -\> waffleEating FK relation](#6-fix-user---waffleeating-fk-relation)
- [7. Add the waffles CRUD page](#7-add-the-waffles-crud-page)
- [8. Add the leaderboard page](#8-add-the-leaderboard-page)
- [9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget](#9-build-the-dashboard---first-custom-widget)
- [10. Build the dashboard - 3 stats overview widget](#10-build-the-dashboard---3-stats-overview-widget)
- [11. Build the dashboard - 2 chart widgets](#11-build-the-dashboard---2-chart-widgets)
- [12. Improve the dashboard - have a global year filter](#12-improve-the-dashboard---have-a-global-year-filter)
- [13. Finished application!! Let's have screenshots.](#13-finished-application-lets-have-screenshots)
- [14. Release the software](#14-release-the-software)
- [15. Improve Installation Speed and Software Security through a better Build Process](#15-improve-installation-speed-and-software-security-through-a-better-build-process)
- [16. Improve the User Interface (UI) \& the User Experience (UX)](#16-improve-the-user-interface-ui--the-user-experience-ux)

## 1. New Laravel+Docker project

The official Docker Guide [Develop and Deploy Laravel applications with Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/guides/frameworks/laravel/)
provides a fresh Laravel project [dockersamples / laravel-docker-examples](https://github.com/dockersamples/laravel-docker-examples),
that implements exactly the architecture proposed in [3_ARCHITECTURE/4.3 System Structure](3_ARCHITECTURE.md#43-system-structure).

- a Docker Compose stack with
- an `nginx` container
- a `php-fpm` container
- a `postgres` container

It is documented how to work with it in the [Developer Docs](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md) and the [Base Project README](BASE-PROJECT-README.md).

After adding the fresh Laravel+Docker project, I removed Redis from it, because I won't need it.

> Commits:
> 
> - `c7030c28`: `setup: add fresh Laravel+Docker project`
> - `a2785485`: `setup: remove Redis`

## 2. Install Filament and create Artisan command for making admin users

- [install Filament v4](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/introduction/installation)

```shell
composer require filament/filament:"^4.0"
php artisan filament:install --panels
```

- adapt the `User` model to (1) allow all users to access the Filament panel and (2) support admin users.
  - put the `is_admin` flag in the `create_users_table` migration and applied the change via `php artisan migrate:fresh`
- created a `make:filament-admin` artisan command by extending the `Filament\Commands\MakeUserCommand`
- removed the `/` route in `web.php` to allow the filament panel (with `path: ''`) to control that route
- removed redis usage from the `.env` and `.env.example`

After that I created myself an admin user, checked that I could access the panel at `http://localhost` and verified by
looking into the database, that the `is_admin` flag is set to `true` for that user.

> Commits:
>
> - `03ff8935`: `setup: install filament, implement admin users, remove Redis from .env`

## 3. Add profile page and fully implement the data model

- add `->profile()` in the `MainPanelProvider` to enable Filament v4's built-in profile page for users
- according to the database schema shown in [3_ARCHITECTURE/4.4. Data Model](3_ARCHITECTURE.md#44-data-model), for the `User` and `WaffleEating` entities
  - create/adapt the migrations
  - create/adapt the models
  - create/adapt the factories
  - write the data seeding

Now I just run `php artisan migrate:fresh --seed` and there's my admin user and some more data in the database.

> Commits:
>
> - `fe6b31d0`: `feat: add profile page, setup: complete models, migrations, factories & seeder`

## 4. Add the users CRUD page (only for admins)

- add the Users CRUD (`php artisan make:filament-resource User`) and customize it
- make it only accessible to admins via a UserPolicy (`php artisan make:policy UserPolicy`) and the `UserResource#shouldRegisterNavigation` method

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/overview#authorization
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/navigation/overview#disabling-resource-or-page-navigation-items

> Commits:
>
> - `6f7e9b71`: `feat: add the users CRUD page (only for admins)`

## 5. Enhance the users CRUD page (only for admins)

There are [Relation Managers](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/managing-relationships#relation-managers---interactive-tables-underneath-your-resource-forms)
in Filament, which are interactive tables below resources that allow managing related records without leaving
the resource's Edit or View page.

Let's use that to always have a table of all WaffleEating records below the User View/Edit form,
when the admin  clicks on a user on the CRUD page. Very practical, to be able to manage it here straight-away!

- create the [relationship manager](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/managing-relationships#creating-a-relation-manager) (`php artisan make:filament-relation-manager UserResource waffleEatings date`)

> Commits:
>
> - `e425416a`: `feat: add relationship manager to the users CRUD page (only for admins)`

## 6. Fix user -> waffleEating FK relation

- it's supposed to be a `user_id` for who ate the waffles and the `entered_by_user_id` for who entered the WaffleEating record -> implement that fix
- remove the vite server (`npm install` & `npm run dev`) from the developer docs, because we don't need/use it (Filament v4’s core CSS and JS assets are prebuilt and published in the `public` folder)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/actions/create#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/overview#accessing-related-data-from-columns

> Commits:
>
> - `1288e4cc`: `fix: use user_id for who ate the waffles & entered_by_user_id for who entered the record`

## 7. Add the waffles CRUD page

- add the WaffleEating CRUD (`php artisan make:filament-resource WaffleEating`) and customize it
  - implement search and filters for the CRUD table
- restrict access via a WaffleEatingPolicy (`php artisan make:policy WaffleEatingPolicy`)
- have the `created_at` and `updated_at` columns in all resource tables, but hidden by default
- fix the `DatabaseSeeder.php`: while creating the 20 random WaffleEating records, it created 2 x 20 new users (unintended)
- after create/edit of a record, redirect to the listing table (implemented in `MainPanelProvider.php`)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/creating-records#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/editing-records#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/select
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/query-builder#creating-custom-operators (`->query()` method)
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/columns/overview#making-toggleable-columns-hidden-by-default

Interesting observation:

Here, setting the `entered_by_user_id` using the `->mutateDataUsing()` function as done in the previous commit in the `WaffleEatingsRelationManager.php` did not work at all.

- I tried chaining that method on the `CreateAction::make()` in `Pages/ListWaffleEatings.php`, where it is defined, but it did not work.
- Similarly, chaining it on the `EditAction::make()` in `Tables/WaffleEatingsTable.php` did do anything.

The solution that worked was to define `mutateFormDataBeforeCreate()` and `mutateFormDataBeforeSave()` methods in the
`Pages/CreateWaffleEating.php` and `Pages/EditWaffleEating.php`.

> Commits:
>
> - `d36e6264`: `feat: add the waffles CRUD page`

## 8. Add the leaderboard page

- add the leaderboard as a Custom Page in Filament (`php artisan make:filament-page Leaderboard`)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/navigation/custom-pages
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/custom-data
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/columns/overview#setting-the-state-of-a-column

> Commits:
>
> - `59e6205c`: `feat: add the leaderboard page`

## 9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget

- add a custom dashboard page and set up a responsive 12-column widget grid
- add the Filament built-in AccountWidget
- add the custom QuoteWidget (`php artisan make:filament-widget QuoteWidget` -> custom, in a panel)
  - set up Tailwind CSS (by having a custom Filament theme) to process classes in my `resources/views/filament` folder and include them in the compiled CSS

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#customizing-the-dashboard-page
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#responsive-widgets-grid
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/styling/overview#using-tailwind-css-classes-in-your-blade-views-or-php-files

> Commits:
>
> - `1f883f4e`: `minor: sort sidebar menu items`
> - `a299c841`: `feat: add the dashboard page with 1 built-in and 1 custom widget, setup: Tailwind CSS`

## 10. Build the dashboard - 3 stats overview widget

- add a WaffleStatsOverview widget (`php artisan make:filament-widget WaffleStatsOverview --stats-overview`) that displays "statistics about waffles eaten and participation this year"

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/stats-overview

> Commits:
>
> - `d696feea`: `feat: add the 3 stats overview widget to the dashboard`

## 11. Build the dashboard - 2 chart widgets

- add the two line chart widgets with a year filter
  - `php artisan make:filament-widget WafflesEatenChart --chart` -> in a panel, line chart
  - `php artisan make:filament-widget WaffleDayParticipationsChart --chart` -> same as above

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts#custom-filters
  - https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/select
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts#setting-chart-configuration-options
- https://www.chartjs.org/docs/latest/charts/line.html
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37699485/skip-decimal-points-on-y-axis-in-chartjs

> Commits:
>
> - `6388e8d5`: `feat: add the 2 line chart widgets to the dashboard`

## 12. Improve the dashboard - have a global year filter

So far the 3 stats overview widgets are pinned to the current year, while the 2 line chart widgets are dynamic.
Let's have one year filter for the whole dashboard (using it across all data-displaying widgets)!

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#filtering-widget-data

> Commits:
>
> - `6fff59c0`: `feat: add global year filter to the dashboard, remove 2 widget-specific filters`

## 13. Finished application!! Let's have screenshots.

For you to be able to get a quick impression of how the waffle dashboard software looks like, I'll add some images. 

> Commits:
>
> - `1f687d08`: `docs: upload screenshots of the application`

## 14. Release the software

> In  a failed attempt, I tried to extend the [base project](BASE-PROJECT-README.md) (see [1. step New Laravel+Docker project](#1-new-laraveldocker-project))
> as it was intended. However, since I added the custom widget in [9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget](#9-build-the-dashboard---first-custom-widget),
> this was no longer easily feasible.
> 
> The reason is that the Tailwind CSS we set up in that step (which runs during `npm build`),
> has dependencies on the Filament in the `vendor` folder.
> 
> So I'll simply do the `composer install` and `npm install && npm run build` both in one `Dockerfile` and won't need a custom Nginx Docker image anymore. 
> 
> Commits:
>
> - `8eb08396`: `release+docs: build & push Docker images, add release & setup instructions, adapt nginx image`
> - `061956a6`: `Revert "release+docs: build & push Docker images, add release & setup instructions, adapt nginx image"`

- add a `docker-compose.yaml` and further setup files in the `docker/deployment` directory
  - test it locally (build the Docker image (see [release guide](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md#how-to-release): just build, don't push) and run `docker compose -f docker-compose.yaml up -d`)
- publish the `leanderchristmann/waffle-dashboard` Docker image
- add a [release guide](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md#how-to-release)
- write the [waffle installation guide](WAFFLE-INSTALLATION-GUIDE.md)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://www.atlantic.net/dedicated-server-hosting/how-to-deploy-laravel-with-docker-and-docker-compose/
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76420466/laravel-vite-production-doesnt-use-https

> Commits:
>
> - `a0588101`: `release+docs: add release & deployment code+instructions`
> - `d7619cc8`: `minor+docs: add last step's commit info in implementation guide`

## 15. Improve Installation Speed and Software Security through a better Build Process

Implement a [multi-stage build](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-stage/) approach (like in the [base project](BASE-PROJECT-README.md)) in the `deployment/php-fpm/Dockerfile`:

- a `builder` stage (with everything: build tools, dev libraries, temporary build artifacts) and
- a slim `production` stage (just the runtime libs + PHP extensions + app code + compiled assets)

Now when I build the image, all the baggage from the builder stage gets left behind, resulting in:

- a smaller `leanderchristmann/waffle-dashboard` Docker image (went down from `365.01 MB` to `276.8 MB`) and thus significantly faster installation time
- improved security, since attackers can't exploit all the previously included dev tools and libraries anymore

> Commits:
>
> - `5080131b`: `build: add multi-stage Docker build for deployment version of the software`

## 16. Improve the User Interface (UI) & the User Experience (UX)

After using the application for some time, some UI/UX improvements are necessary:

- remove unwelcome dashboard elements AccountWidget & QuoteWidget from the Dashboard UI + do some minor text changes

Commit message:

feat: make WaffleEating a simple (modal) resource

docs/4_IMPLEMENTATION.md, after:

# Implementation (Coding) <!-- omit in toc -->

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [1. New Laravel+Docker project](#1-new-laraveldocker-project)
- [2. Install Filament and create Artisan command for making admin users](#2-install-filament-and-create-artisan-command-for-making-admin-users)
- [3. Add profile page and fully implement the data model](#3-add-profile-page-and-fully-implement-the-data-model)
- [4. Add the users CRUD page (only for admins)](#4-add-the-users-crud-page-only-for-admins)
- [5. Enhance the users CRUD page (only for admins)](#5-enhance-the-users-crud-page-only-for-admins)
- [6. Fix user -\> waffleEating FK relation](#6-fix-user---waffleeating-fk-relation)
- [7. Add the waffles CRUD page](#7-add-the-waffles-crud-page)
- [8. Add the leaderboard page](#8-add-the-leaderboard-page)
- [9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget](#9-build-the-dashboard---first-custom-widget)
- [10. Build the dashboard - 3 stats overview widget](#10-build-the-dashboard---3-stats-overview-widget)
- [11. Build the dashboard - 2 chart widgets](#11-build-the-dashboard---2-chart-widgets)
- [12. Improve the dashboard - have a global year filter](#12-improve-the-dashboard---have-a-global-year-filter)
- [13. Finished application!! Let's have screenshots.](#13-finished-application-lets-have-screenshots)
- [14. Release the software](#14-release-the-software)
- [15. Improve Installation Speed and Software Security through a better Build Process](#15-improve-installation-speed-and-software-security-through-a-better-build-process)
- [16. Improve the User Interface (UI) \& the User Experience (UX)](#16-improve-the-user-interface-ui--the-user-experience-ux)

## 1. New Laravel+Docker project

The official Docker Guide [Develop and Deploy Laravel applications with Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/guides/frameworks/laravel/)
provides a fresh Laravel project [dockersamples / laravel-docker-examples](https://github.com/dockersamples/laravel-docker-examples),
that implements exactly the architecture proposed in [3_ARCHITECTURE/4.3 System Structure](3_ARCHITECTURE.md#43-system-structure).

- a Docker Compose stack with
- an `nginx` container
- a `php-fpm` container
- a `postgres` container

It is documented how to work with it in the [Developer Docs](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md) and the [Base Project README](BASE-PROJECT-README.md).

After adding the fresh Laravel+Docker project, I removed Redis from it, because I won't need it.

> Commits:
> 
> - `c7030c28`: `setup: add fresh Laravel+Docker project`
> - `a2785485`: `setup: remove Redis`

## 2. Install Filament and create Artisan command for making admin users

- [install Filament v4](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/introduction/installation)

```shell
composer require filament/filament:"^4.0"
php artisan filament:install --panels
```

- adapt the `User` model to (1) allow all users to access the Filament panel and (2) support admin users.
  - put the `is_admin` flag in the `create_users_table` migration and applied the change via `php artisan migrate:fresh`
- created a `make:filament-admin` artisan command by extending the `Filament\Commands\MakeUserCommand`
- removed the `/` route in `web.php` to allow the filament panel (with `path: ''`) to control that route
- removed redis usage from the `.env` and `.env.example`

After that I created myself an admin user, checked that I could access the panel at `http://localhost` and verified by
looking into the database, that the `is_admin` flag is set to `true` for that user.

> Commits:
>
> - `03ff8935`: `setup: install filament, implement admin users, remove Redis from .env`

## 3. Add profile page and fully implement the data model

- add `->profile()` in the `MainPanelProvider` to enable Filament v4's built-in profile page for users
- according to the database schema shown in [3_ARCHITECTURE/4.4. Data Model](3_ARCHITECTURE.md#44-data-model), for the `User` and `WaffleEating` entities
  - create/adapt the migrations
  - create/adapt the models
  - create/adapt the factories
  - write the data seeding

Now I just run `php artisan migrate:fresh --seed` and there's my admin user and some more data in the database.

> Commits:
>
> - `fe6b31d0`: `feat: add profile page, setup: complete models, migrations, factories & seeder`

## 4. Add the users CRUD page (only for admins)

- add the Users CRUD (`php artisan make:filament-resource User`) and customize it
- make it only accessible to admins via a UserPolicy (`php artisan make:policy UserPolicy`) and the `UserResource#shouldRegisterNavigation` method

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/overview#authorization
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/navigation/overview#disabling-resource-or-page-navigation-items

> Commits:
>
> - `6f7e9b71`: `feat: add the users CRUD page (only for admins)`

## 5. Enhance the users CRUD page (only for admins)

There are [Relation Managers](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/managing-relationships#relation-managers---interactive-tables-underneath-your-resource-forms)
in Filament, which are interactive tables below resources that allow managing related records without leaving
the resource's Edit or View page.

Let's use that to always have a table of all WaffleEating records below the User View/Edit form,
when the admin  clicks on a user on the CRUD page. Very practical, to be able to manage it here straight-away!

- create the [relationship manager](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/managing-relationships#creating-a-relation-manager) (`php artisan make:filament-relation-manager UserResource waffleEatings date`)

> Commits:
>
> - `e425416a`: `feat: add relationship manager to the users CRUD page (only for admins)`

## 6. Fix user -> waffleEating FK relation

- it's supposed to be a `user_id` for who ate the waffles and the `entered_by_user_id` for who entered the WaffleEating record -> implement that fix
- remove the vite server (`npm install` & `npm run dev`) from the developer docs, because we don't need/use it (Filament v4’s core CSS and JS assets are prebuilt and published in the `public` folder)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/actions/create#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/overview#accessing-related-data-from-columns

> Commits:
>
> - `1288e4cc`: `fix: use user_id for who ate the waffles & entered_by_user_id for who entered the record`

## 7. Add the waffles CRUD page

- add the WaffleEating CRUD (`php artisan make:filament-resource WaffleEating`) and customize it
  - implement search and filters for the CRUD table
- restrict access via a WaffleEatingPolicy (`php artisan make:policy WaffleEatingPolicy`)
- have the `created_at` and `updated_at` columns in all resource tables, but hidden by default
- fix the `DatabaseSeeder.php`: while creating the 20 random WaffleEating records, it created 2 x 20 new users (unintended)
- after create/edit of a record, redirect to the listing table (implemented in `MainPanelProvider.php`)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/creating-records#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/editing-records#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/select
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/filters/query-builder#creating-custom-operators (`->query()` method)
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/columns/overview#making-toggleable-columns-hidden-by-default

Interesting observation:

Here, setting the `entered_by_user_id` using the `->mutateDataUsing()` function as done in the previous commit in the `WaffleEatingsRelationManager.php` did not work at all.

- I tried chaining that method on the `CreateAction::make()` in `Pages/ListWaffleEatings.php`, where it is defined, but it did not work.
- Similarly, chaining it on the `EditAction::make()` in `Tables/WaffleEatingsTable.php` did do anything.

The solution that worked was to define `mutateFormDataBeforeCreate()` and `mutateFormDataBeforeSave()` methods in the
`Pages/CreateWaffleEating.php` and `Pages/EditWaffleEating.php`.

> Commits:
>
> - `d36e6264`: `feat: add the waffles CRUD page`

## 8. Add the leaderboard page

- add the leaderboard as a Custom Page in Filament (`php artisan make:filament-page Leaderboard`)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/navigation/custom-pages
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/custom-data
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/tables/columns/overview#setting-the-state-of-a-column

> Commits:
>
> - `59e6205c`: `feat: add the leaderboard page`

## 9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget

- add a custom dashboard page and set up a responsive 12-column widget grid
- add the Filament built-in AccountWidget
- add the custom QuoteWidget (`php artisan make:filament-widget QuoteWidget` -> custom, in a panel)
  - set up Tailwind CSS (by having a custom Filament theme) to process classes in my `resources/views/filament` folder and include them in the compiled CSS

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#customizing-the-dashboard-page
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#responsive-widgets-grid
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/styling/overview#using-tailwind-css-classes-in-your-blade-views-or-php-files

> Commits:
>
> - `1f883f4e`: `minor: sort sidebar menu items`
> - `a299c841`: `feat: add the dashboard page with 1 built-in and 1 custom widget, setup: Tailwind CSS`

## 10. Build the dashboard - 3 stats overview widget

- add a WaffleStatsOverview widget (`php artisan make:filament-widget WaffleStatsOverview --stats-overview`) that displays "statistics about waffles eaten and participation this year"

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/stats-overview

> Commits:
>
> - `d696feea`: `feat: add the 3 stats overview widget to the dashboard`

## 11. Build the dashboard - 2 chart widgets

- add the two line chart widgets with a year filter
  - `php artisan make:filament-widget WafflesEatenChart --chart` -> in a panel, line chart
  - `php artisan make:filament-widget WaffleDayParticipationsChart --chart` -> same as above

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts#custom-filters
  - https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/select
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/charts#setting-chart-configuration-options
- https://www.chartjs.org/docs/latest/charts/line.html
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37699485/skip-decimal-points-on-y-axis-in-chartjs

> Commits:
>
> - `6388e8d5`: `feat: add the 2 line chart widgets to the dashboard`

## 12. Improve the dashboard - have a global year filter

So far the 3 stats overview widgets are pinned to the current year, while the 2 line chart widgets are dynamic.
Let's have one year filter for the whole dashboard (using it across all data-displaying widgets)!

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/widgets/overview#filtering-widget-data

> Commits:
>
> - `6fff59c0`: `feat: add global year filter to the dashboard, remove 2 widget-specific filters`

## 13. Finished application!! Let's have screenshots.

For you to be able to get a quick impression of how the waffle dashboard software looks like, I'll add some images. 

> Commits:
>
> - `1f687d08`: `docs: upload screenshots of the application`

## 14. Release the software

> In  a failed attempt, I tried to extend the [base project](BASE-PROJECT-README.md) (see [1. step New Laravel+Docker project](#1-new-laraveldocker-project))
> as it was intended. However, since I added the custom widget in [9. Build the dashboard - first custom widget](#9-build-the-dashboard---first-custom-widget),
> this was no longer easily feasible.
> 
> The reason is that the Tailwind CSS we set up in that step (which runs during `npm build`),
> has dependencies on the Filament in the `vendor` folder.
> 
> So I'll simply do the `composer install` and `npm install && npm run build` both in one `Dockerfile` and won't need a custom Nginx Docker image anymore. 
> 
> Commits:
>
> - `8eb08396`: `release+docs: build & push Docker images, add release & setup instructions, adapt nginx image`
> - `061956a6`: `Revert "release+docs: build & push Docker images, add release & setup instructions, adapt nginx image"`

- add a `docker-compose.yaml` and further setup files in the `docker/deployment` directory
  - test it locally (build the Docker image (see [release guide](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md#how-to-release): just build, don't push) and run `docker compose -f docker-compose.yaml up -d`)
- publish the `leanderchristmann/waffle-dashboard` Docker image
- add a [release guide](../DEVELOPER-DOCS.md#how-to-release)
- write the [waffle installation guide](WAFFLE-INSTALLATION-GUIDE.md)

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://www.atlantic.net/dedicated-server-hosting/how-to-deploy-laravel-with-docker-and-docker-compose/
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76420466/laravel-vite-production-doesnt-use-https

> Commits:
>
> - `a0588101`: `release+docs: add release & deployment code+instructions`
> - `d7619cc8`: `minor+docs: add last step's commit info in implementation guide`

## 15. Improve Installation Speed and Software Security through a better Build Process

Implement a [multi-stage build](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-stage/) approach (like in the [base project](BASE-PROJECT-README.md)) in the `deployment/php-fpm/Dockerfile`:

- a `builder` stage (with everything: build tools, dev libraries, temporary build artifacts) and
- a slim `production` stage (just the runtime libs + PHP extensions + app code + compiled assets)

Now when I build the image, all the baggage from the builder stage gets left behind, resulting in:

- a smaller `leanderchristmann/waffle-dashboard` Docker image (went down from `365.01 MB` to `276.8 MB`) and thus significantly faster installation time
- improved security, since attackers can't exploit all the previously included dev tools and libraries anymore

> Commits:
>
> - `5080131b`: `build: add multi-stage Docker build for deployment version of the software`

## 16. Improve the User Interface (UI) & the User Experience (UX)

After using the application for some time and being inspired by features encountered in the [Filament 4 From Scratch course by Laravel Daily](https://laraveldaily.com/course/filament-4),
some UI/UX improvements are necessary:

- remove unwelcome dashboard elements AccountWidget & QuoteWidget from the Dashboard UI + do some minor text changes
- make the WaffleEating a simple (modal) resource instead of a normal resource for a better (faster, simpler) user experience

Some helpful documentation pages:

- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/resources/overview#simple-modal-resources
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/actions/create#customizing-data-before-saving
- https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/actions/edit#customizing-data-before-saving

> Commits:
>
> - `7da2d1b4`: `minor: remove Account- & QuoteWidget from dashboard, text changes`
